project: listeners management documentation page (#550)
mia-platform/documentation: docs/development_suite/api-console/api-design/listeners.md

---
id: listeners
title: Create Listeners
sidebar_label: Create Listeners
---

## What is a Listener

A Listener is a logical entity configured on your API Gateway that checks for incoming connection requests directed to your cluster.  
Each listener is mapped to a single port and defines rules to route incoming requests from external clients to a resource in your cluster, such as a specific microservice, exposed through endpoints.

This page describes the features of a Listener and how to configure these from the **Listeners** section of the [Design area](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/overview.md) of the Console.

:::info
Currently Listeners are available only to Projects configured to use an **Envoy API Gateway**.
:::

## Create a Listener

> Follow this three steps in order to create the new Listener and make an Endpoint reachable from outside the Console:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow these three steps in order to create a new Listener and make an Endpoint reachable from outside the Console:
```

- create the new Listener resource
- expose the Endpoint on the Listener
- define a new Traefik IngressRoute for the newly exposed API Gateway port

### Defining the Listener 

> Creating a new Listener is as easy as clicking on the **Add listener** button and specifying its `name` and `port`. Both these two fields must be unique on your Project.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a new listener, just click the **Add Listener** button and specify its `name` and `port`. Both fields must be unique in the Project. 
```

Optionally, you can define whether to:
- **expose new endpoints on the listener** by deafult

> - **expose all existing endpoints** on the listener

Reviewer: For these two options, I would explain a little more extensively what they imply

![create-listener](img/listeners/create-listener.png)

Creating a new Listener means opening the relative container port on the Api Gateway too. This step is automated and in fact you can find the new port under the Container Ports section of the API Gateway.  
Container Ports associated to Listeners cannot be deleted. To delete them firstly delete the Listener and then you can delete the port.

<!-- TODO: update image with disabled buttons -->
![listeners-api-gateway-container-ports](img/listeners/listeners-api-gateway-ports.png)

### Exposing an Endpoint on the Listener

> Once the new Listener has been created you can select it from the [Listener Settings section](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/endpoints.md#listeners) of an Endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the new listener has been created, it can be selected from the [Listener Settings section](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/endpoints.md#listeners) within the Endpoint detail page of the project.
```

### Define the Kubernetes Ingress

In order to receive incoming requests from the newly exposed API Gateway port, it is required to define the [Traefik IngressRoute](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/routing/providers/kubernetes-crd/#kind-ingressroute) for the same port too.  
To do this, on the git repository of your Project locate the correct `.ingressroute.yaml` file for your environment and extend it with the new route and defining a new `host`. The resulting file should look like this:

``` yaml
apiVersion: traefik.containo.us/v1alpha1
kind: IngressRoute
metadata: # your metadata here ...
spec:
  entrypoints: # your entrypoints config here ...
  routes:
  - # some already existing route here ...
  - match: Host(`<put-a-host-here>.<your-domain-here>`) # e.g.: Host(`mobile-apis.your-domain.com`)
    kind: Rule
    services:
      - name: api-gateway # the name of your API Gateway service
        port: 8082 # the port just exposed

```

> At this point

Reviewer: There is an interrupted sentence

> 

Reviewer: I'd add a new paragraph for "Edit (/modify) a listener". Here, I would explain what implies a modification of listener also from a container port side.

Reviewer 2: added

## Delete a Listener

To delete a listener just click on the delete action.

:::warning

> Be aware that if the Listener is the only one exposing some endpoints, these will be deleted as well.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be aware that if some Endpoints are exposed only on the listener you want to delete, they will be deleted too.
```

### Exposing an Endpoint on the Listener

Once the new Listener has been created, it can be selected from the [Listener Settings section](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/endpoints.md#listeners) within the Endpoint detail page of the project.

### Configure the Kubernetes Ingress Controller

In order to receive incoming requests from the newly exposed API Gateway port, it is required to configure the [Kubernetes Ingress Controller](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress-controllers/) to make the exposed port reachable.  

:::info
For example, if your Kubernetes cluster is configured to use [Traefik](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/providers/kubernetes-ingress/) as Ingress Controller provider, you may need to define a new [IngressRoute](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/providers/kubernetes-crd/).

For more details on configuring a new IngressRoute, please refer to [this guide](/paas/traefik.md#expose-an-endpoint).
:::

## Edit a Listener

From the **Listeners** section of the [Design area](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/overview.md) of the Console it is possible to update settings of a Listener.

> Changes made to the port of the Listener will be reflected on the Container Ports of the API Gateway too.  

Reviewer: If you modify a listener, are there changes to be reflected also on the ingress route?

---
id: listeners
title: Create Listeners
sidebar_label: Create Listeners
---

## What is a Listener

A Listener is a logical entity configured on your API Gateway that checks for incoming connection requests directed to your cluster.  
Each listener is mapped to a single port and defines rules to route incoming requests from external clients to a resource in your cluster, such as a specific microservice, exposed through endpoints.

This page describes the features of a Listener and how to configure these from the **Listeners** section of the [Design area](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/overview.md) of the Console.

:::info

> Currently Listeners are only available to Projects using an **Envoy API Gateway**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently Listeners are only available for Projects using an **Envoy API Gateway**.
```

:::

## Create a Listener

Follow these three steps in order to create a new Listener and make an Endpoint reachable from outside the Console:
- Create the new Listener resource
- Expose the Endpoint on the Listener
- Configure the [Kubernetes Ingress Controller](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress-controllers/) to make the new exposed port reachable

### Defining the Listener 

To create a new listener, just click the **Add Listener** button and specify its `name` and `port`. Both fields must be unique in the Project. 

Optionally, during listener creation, you can define whether to:

> - **expose all new endpoints** that will be created on that listener by default

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **select the listener** by default when creating a new endpoint
```

> Optionally, you can define whether to:
> - **expose new endpoints on the listener** by default
> - **expose all existing endpoints** on the listener

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optionally, during listener creation, you can define whether to:
- **expose all new endpoints that will be created on that listener** by default
- **expose all existing endpoints** on that listener
```

![create-listener](img/listeners/create-listener.png)

Creating a new Listener means opening the relative container port on the API Gateway too. This step is automated and in fact you can find the new port under the Container Ports section of the API Gateway.  

> :::caution

Reviewer 3: better spacing

```suggestion

:::caution
```

Container Ports associated to Listeners cannot be deleted. To delete them firstly delete the Listener and then you can delete the port.
:::

<!-- TODO: update image with disabled buttons -->
![listeners-api-gateway-container-ports](img/listeners/listeners-api-gateway-ports.png)

### Exposing an Endpoint on the Listener

Once the new Listener has been created, it can be selected from the [Listener Settings section](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/endpoints.md#listeners) within the Endpoint detail page of the project.

### Configure the Kubernetes Ingress Controller

In order to receive incoming requests from the newly exposed API Gateway port, it is required to configure the [Kubernetes Ingress Controller](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress-controllers/) to make the exposed port reachable.  

:::info
For example, if your Kubernetes cluster is configured to use [Traefik](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/providers/kubernetes-ingress/) as Ingress Controller provider, you may need to define a new [IngressRoute](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/providers/kubernetes-crd/).

> To do this, on the git repository of your Project locate the correct `.ingressroute.yaml` file for your environment and extend it with the new route and defining a new `host`.  

Reviewer 3: instead of reporting here this piece of doc could we link this page?

https://docs.mia-platform.eu/docs/paas/traefik#expose-an-endpoint

---
id: listeners
title: Create Listeners
sidebar_label: Create Listeners
---

## Listeners Management

From the Design area you can manage your Listeners and control where your Endpoints are exposed. This means that you can map Endpoints to different Listeners, which will make them available on different exposed domains.

:::info
Currently only Projects configured with an [**Envoy API Gateway**](/runtime_suite/envoy-api-gateway/overview.md) can access the Listeners feature.
:::

## What is a Listener

A Listener is a logical entity configured on your API Gateway that checks for incoming connection requests directed to your Project namespace.  
Each listener is mapped to a single port and defines rules to route incoming requests from external clients to a resource in your namespace, such as a specific microservice, exposed through endpoints.

> This page describes the features of a Listener and how to configure these from the **Listeners** section of the [Design area](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/overview.md) of the Console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page describes the features of a Listener and how to configure them from the **Listeners** section of the [Design area](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/overview.md) in Console.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Create a Listener

There are three main steps needed to make an Endpoint reachable from outside the Console:
- Create the new Listener resource
- Expose the Endpoint on the Listener
- Configure the [Kubernetes Ingress Controller](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress-controllers/) to make the new exposed port reachable

### Defining the Listener 

To create a new listener, just click the **Add Listener** button and specify its `name` and `port`. Both fields must be unique in the Project. 

Optionally, during listener creation, you can define whether to:
- **set the listener as default**, so that it is pre-selected when creating new endpoints. This comes in handy if you think you will use the listener to expose many new endpoints. You can always de-select it if needed.
- **expose all existing endpoints** on that listener

![create-listener](img/listeners/create-listener.png)

Creating a new Listener means opening the relative container port on the API Gateway too. This step is automated and in fact you can find the new port under the Container Ports section of the API Gateway.  

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

:::caution
Container Ports associated to Listeners cannot be deleted. To delete them firstly delete the Listener and then you can delete the port.
:::

![listeners-api-gateway-container-ports](img/listeners/listeners-api-gateway-ports.png)

### Exposing an Endpoint on the Listener

There are two ways to expose an Endpoint on the Listener:

> - selecting the desired Listener from the [Listener Settings section](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/endpoints.md#listeners) within the Endpoint detail page of the project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- selecting the desired Listener from the [Listener Settings section](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/endpoints.md#listeners) within the Endpoint detail page of the Project
```

> - selecting the desired Listener from the specific [Endpoints table](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/listeners.md#endpoints-overview).

Reviewer 4: remember to fix the link if change the following title

> - selecting the desired Listener from the specific [Endpoints table](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/listeners.md#endpoints-overview).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- selecting the desired Listener from the specific [Endpoints table](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/listeners.md#endpoints-overview) within Listeners section
```

> - selecting the desired Listener from the specific [Endpoints table](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/listeners.md#endpoints-overview).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- selecting the desired Listener from the specific [Endpoints table](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/listeners.md#endpoints-list-with-their-listener-relations).
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Listeners overview for Endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Endpoints list with their listener relations
```

> This table provides an overview of which Endpoint is exposed by which Listeners.  
> It is possible to edit this configuration by just selecting the desired Listener for the desired Endpoint. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Endpoints tab contains a table provides an overview of which Endpoint is exposed by which Listeners.  
It is possible to edit this configuration by just selecting the desired Listener for the desired Endpoint. 
```

![listeners-api-gateway-container-ports](img/listeners/endpoints-listeners-table.png)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

:::info
For example, if your Kubernetes cluster is configured to use [Traefik](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/providers/kubernetes-ingress/) as Ingress Controller provider, you may need to define a new [IngressRoute](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/providers/kubernetes-crd/).

For more details on configuring a new `IngressRoute`, please refer to [this guide](/paas/traefik.md#expose-an-endpoint).
:::

## Edit a Listener

From the **Listeners** section of the [Design area](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/overview.md) of the Console it is possible to update settings of a Listener.

Changes made to the port of the Listener will be reflected on the Container Ports of the API Gateway too.  
This means that changing the port of a Listener will also enable the relative port on the API Gateway. The old port of the API Gateway stays enabled and it is up to the user to disable it if needed. 

:::warning
Make sure to modify the Kubernetes Ingress Controller accordingly.
:::

![edit-listener](img/listeners/edit-listener.png)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## What is a Listener

A Listener is a logical entity configured on your API Gateway that checks for incoming connection requests directed to your cluster.  
Each listener is mapped to a single port and defines rules to route incoming requests from external clients to a resource in your cluster, such as a specific microservice, exposed through endpoints.

This page describes the features of a Listener and how to configure these from the **Listeners** section of the [Design area](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/overview.md) of the Console.

:::info

> Currently Listeners are available only to Projects configured to use an **Envoy API Gateway**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently Listeners are only available to Projects using an **Envoy API Gateway**.
```

:::

## Create a Listener

Follow this three steps in order to create the new Listener and make an Endpoint reachable from outside the Console:
- create the new Listener resource
- expose the Endpoint on the Listener

> - define a new Traefik IngressRoute for the newly exposed API Gateway port

Reviewer 3: this depends on the ingress route you are using; I'd put this into a warning box that remembers the user that it may need to configure their cluster ingress to route traffic towards the newly defined listener port, e.g. using traefik you may want to add a new route in the IngressRoute resource.

Reviewer 2: made both here and description below more generic on Ingress configuration and added an example for traefik

### Defining the Listener 

Creating a new Listener is as easy as clicking on the **Add listener** button and specifying its `name` and `port`. Both these two fields must be unique on your Project.  

Optionally, you can define whether to:

> - **expose new endpoints on the listener** by deafult

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **expose new endpoints on the listener** by default
```

- **expose all existing endpoints** on the listener

![create-listener](img/listeners/create-listener.png)

> Creating a new Listener means opening the relative container port on the Api Gateway too. This step is automated and in fact you can find the new port under the Container Ports section of the API Gateway.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Creating a new Listener means opening the relative container port on the API Gateway too. This step is automated and in fact you can find the new port under the Container Ports section of the API Gateway.  
```

Container Ports associated to Listeners cannot be deleted. To delete them firstly delete the Listener and then you can delete the port.

<!-- TODO: update image with disabled buttons -->
![listeners-api-gateway-container-ports](img/listeners/listeners-api-gateway-ports.png)

### Exposing an Endpoint on the Listener

Once the new Listener has been created you can select it from the [Listener Settings section](/development_suite/api-console/api-design/endpoints.md#listeners) of an Endpoint.

### Define the Kubernetes Ingress

> In order to receive incoming requests from the newly exposed API Gateway port, it is required to define the [Traefik IngressRoute](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/routing/providers/kubernetes-crd/#kind-ingressroute) for the same port too.  

Reviewer 3: traefik is just one of the possibilities, this solely depends on the cluster ingress; so let's rephrase this as an example when using traefik (I'd collapse this info in the same warning box for the above comment)
